Workshops/Week4/3-Ethical-and-Security-Considerations.md, before:

# Ethical and Security Considerations with GitHub Copilot

**Duration:** 30-45 minutes  
**Format:** Discussion-led session with real-world scenarios  
**Objective:** Understand the ethical implications, security risks, and responsible practices when using AI-assisted coding tools.

---

## Session Overview

AI coding assistants like GitHub Copilot are powerful tools, but they come with responsibilities. This session explores the critical ethical and security considerations developers must understand.

**What you'll learn:**
- Intellectual property considerations in AI-generated code
- Security vulnerabilities and how to prevent them
- Responsible AI usage and bias awareness
- Organisational policies and compliance
- Best practices for safe AI-assisted development

---

## 1. Intellectual Property Considerations

### Understanding How Copilot Works

GitHub Copilot was trained on publicly available code from GitHub repositories. This raises important questions:

| Concern | Description | Mitigation |
|---------|-------------|------------|
| **License Attribution** | Generated code may resemble open-source code | Review for familiar patterns, add attribution where needed |
| **Copyrighted Code** | Rare exact matches to training data possible | Use Copilot's duplicate detection filter |
| **Company IP** | Your prompts and code may be used for training | Review data retention settings |
| **Patent Concerns** | Generated algorithms might infringe patents | Review novel implementations carefully |

### Copilot Settings for IP Protection

**Enabling Duplicate Detection:**

In VS Code settings, enable:
```json
{
  "github.copilot.advanced": {
    "debug.filterLogCategories": [],
    "listCount": 3
  }
}
```

GitHub Copilot for Business provides additional controls:
- Disable suggestions matching public code
- Block suggestions from specific repositories
- Control data retention policies

### Best Practices for IP Safety

1. **Review generated code** - Don't blindly accept, especially for algorithms
2. **Check for attribution** - If code looks familiar, search for its origin
3. **Use organisation settings** - Enable corporate IP protections
4. **Document AI usage** - Note when significant code is AI-generated
5. **Understand your licence** - Know what Copilot's terms allow

---

## 2. Security Vulnerabilities

### Common Security Risks in AI-Generated Code

**1. SQL Injection Vulnerabilities**

**Risky Generated Code:**
```python
def get_user(username):
    # DANGEROUS: SQL injection vulnerability
    query = f"SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = '{username}'"
    return db.execute(query)
```

**Secure Alternative:**
```python
def get_user(username: str) -> Optional[User]:
    """Safely retrieve user by username using parameterised query."""
    query = "SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = %s"
    return db.execute(query, (username,))
```

**2. Hardcoded Secrets**

**Risky Pattern:**
```python
# DANGEROUS: Copilot might suggest realistic-looking credentials
API_KEY = "sk-1234567890abcdef"
DATABASE_URL = "postgresql://admin:password123@localhost/db"
```

**Secure Alternative:**
```python
import os
from dotenv import load_dotenv

load_dotenv()

API_KEY = os.environ.get("API_KEY")
DATABASE_URL = os.environ.get("DATABASE_URL")

if not API_KEY or not DATABASE_URL:
    raise EnvironmentError("Required environment variables not set")
```

**3. Insecure Cryptography**

**Risky Generated Code:**
```python
import hashlib

def hash_password(password):
    # DANGEROUS: MD5 is cryptographically broken
    return hashlib.md5(password.encode()).hexdigest()
```

**Secure Alternative:**
```python
import bcrypt

def hash_password(password: str) -> bytes:
    """Hash password using bcrypt with appropriate work factor."""
    salt = bcrypt.gensalt(rounds=12)
    return bcrypt.hashpw(password.encode('utf-8'), salt)

def verify_password(password: str, hashed: bytes) -> bool:
    """Verify password against stored hash."""
    return bcrypt.checkpw(password.encode('utf-8'), hashed)
```

**4. Path Traversal Vulnerabilities**

**Risky Generated Code:**
```python
def read_file(filename):
    # DANGEROUS: Allows reading any file on the system
    with open(f"/uploads/{filename}") as f:
        return f.read()
```

**Secure Alternative:**
```python
import os
from pathlib import Path

UPLOAD_DIR = Path("/uploads").resolve()

def read_file(filename: str) -> str:
    """Safely read file from uploads directory."""
    # Resolve the path and verify it's within UPLOAD_DIR
    file_path = (UPLOAD_DIR / filename).resolve()
    
    if not file_path.is_relative_to(UPLOAD_DIR):
        raise ValueError("Invalid file path")
    
    if not file_path.exists():
        raise FileNotFoundError(f"File not found: {filename}")
    
    return file_path.read_text()
```

---

### Security Review Prompts

**Prompt for Security Audit:**
```text
Perform a security audit on this code. Check for:
1. Injection vulnerabilities (SQL, command, XSS)
2. Authentication/authorisation flaws
3. Cryptographic weaknesses
4. Sensitive data exposure
5. Input validation gaps
6. Error handling issues that leak information

Provide severity rating and remediation for each finding.

[paste code here]
```

**Prompt for Secure Implementation:**
```text
Generate a secure implementation with these requirements:
- Input validation and sanitisation
- Parameterised queries for database access
- No hardcoded credentials
- Proper error handling without information leakage
- Secure cryptographic functions where needed
- OWASP Top 10 protection

Function: User authentication with password hashing
```

---

### Security Scanning Integration

**Prompt for Pre-Commit Security Check:**
```text
Create a pre-commit hook that scans for:
1. Hardcoded API keys or secrets (regex patterns)
2. SQL string concatenation
3. eval() or exec() usage
4. Insecure hash functions (MD5, SHA1)
5. HTTP URLs instead of HTTPS
6. Debug/development flags in production code

Fail commit if any issues found.
```

---

## 3. Responsible AI Usage

### Bias in AI-Generated Code

AI models can perpetuate biases present in training data:

| Bias Type | Example | Impact |
|-----------|---------|--------|
| **Variable naming** | Gender-specific defaults | Exclusionary code |
| **Assumptions** | Western-centric date formats | International users affected |
| **Stereotypes** | Role-based examples | Reinforces social biases |
| **Accessibility** | Missing ARIA labels | Excludes disabled users |

**Example of Biased Generation:**
```javascript
// Prompt: "Create a user profile form"
// Potentially biased output:
const userForm = {
    title: ['Mr', 'Mrs', 'Miss'],  // Missing inclusive options
    gender: ['Male', 'Female'],     // Binary assumption
    name: { first: '', last: '' }   // Assumes Western naming convention
};
```

**Inclusive Alternative:**
```javascript
const userForm = {
    title: ['Mr', 'Mrs', 'Ms', 'Mx', 'Dr', 'Prof', 'Prefer not to say'],
    gender: ['Male', 'Female', 'Non-binary', 'Prefer to self-describe', 'Prefer not to say'],
    name: { 
        displayName: '',      // Flexible for all cultures
        legalName: '',        // When legally required
        preferredName: ''     // User preference
    }
};
```

### Prompting for Inclusive Code

**Prompt:**
```text
Generate a user registration form that:
- Uses inclusive language and options
- Supports international name formats
- Provides flexible gender options
- Includes accessibility features (ARIA labels)
- Works with screen readers
- Supports right-to-left languages
```

---

### AI Transparency

**When to disclose AI usage:**

- **Internal documentation** - Note when significant code blocks are AI-generated
- **Code reviews** - Inform reviewers of AI assistance
- **Compliance contexts** - Some industries require disclosure
- **Educational settings** - Academic integrity requirements

**Documentation Pattern:**
```python
# AI-ASSISTED: Initial implementation generated with GitHub Copilot
# REVIEWED: [Date] by [Developer]
# MODIFIED: [List significant changes from original generation]
def complex_algorithm():
    """
    Implementation of X algorithm.
    
    Note: Core logic AI-generated, security review completed,
    edge cases added manually.
    """
    pass
```

---

## 4. Organisational Policies

### Developing an AI Coding Policy

**Key Policy Components:**

```markdown
# AI-Assisted Coding Policy

## Approved Tools
- GitHub Copilot (Business tier only)
- [List other approved tools]

## Prohibited Uses
- Generating code for security-critical systems without review
- Using AI for client-confidential codebases without approval
- Accepting suggestions without understanding them
- Bypassing code review processes

## Required Practices
1. Enable duplicate detection filters
2. Review all AI suggestions before accepting
3. Run security scans on AI-generated code
4. Document significant AI-assisted implementations
5. Report concerning suggestions

## Data Handling
- No client data in prompts
- No proprietary algorithms as context
- Follow data classification guidelines

## Review Requirements
- AI-generated code requires standard code review
- Security-sensitive code requires additional security review
- Novel algorithms require architecture review
```

### Team Guidelines Prompt

**Prompt:**
```text
Create a team code review checklist specifically for AI-generated code:
- What additional scrutiny is needed?
- What patterns should reviewers watch for?
- How should AI assistance be documented in PRs?
- What questions should reviewers ask?
```

---

## 5. Practical Security Checklist

### Before Accepting AI Suggestions

- [ ] **Understand the code** - Can you explain what it does?
- [ ] **Check inputs** - Is all user input validated?
- [ ] **Review queries** - Are database queries parameterised?
- [ ] **Verify authentication** - Is access properly controlled?
- [ ] **Examine secrets** - Are there any hardcoded credentials?
- [ ] **Test error handling** - Does it fail safely?
- [ ] **Consider edge cases** - What happens with unexpected input?

### Code Review Checklist for AI-Generated Code

- [ ] **Logic verification** - Does the code do what was intended?
- [ ] **Security review** - Are there any OWASP Top 10 vulnerabilities?
- [ ] **Performance check** - Are there efficiency concerns?
- [ ] **Dependency review** - Are imported libraries secure and necessary?
- [ ] **Test coverage** - Are tests comprehensive and meaningful?
- [ ] **Documentation** - Is the code properly documented?
- [ ] **Standards compliance** - Does it follow team conventions?

---

## 6. Scenario Exercises

### Scenario 1: Suspicious Suggestion

You ask Copilot to generate a login function and it produces:

```python
def login(username, password):
    if username == "admin" and password == "admin123":
        return True
    # ... rest of implementation
```

**Discussion:**
- Why might Copilot suggest this?
- What's the security risk?
- How should you respond?

---

### Scenario 2: Familiar Code

Copilot suggests a sorting algorithm that looks identical to a well-known open-source implementation.

**Discussion:**
- What are the IP implications?
- Should you accept this suggestion?
- How do you verify the origin?

---

### Scenario 3: Biased Generation

When generating test data, Copilot produces:

```javascript
const employees = [
    { name: 'John', role: 'Engineer', salary: 100000 },
    { name: 'Sarah', role: 'Secretary', salary: 45000 },
    { name: 'Mike', role: 'Manager', salary: 120000 }
];
```

**Discussion:**
- What bias is present?
- How might this affect your application?
- How would you prompt for better test data?

---

## Key Takeaways

1. **AI is a tool, not a replacement** - You remain responsible for the code
2. **Trust but verify** - Always review AI suggestions critically
3. **Security first** - Assume AI-generated code may have vulnerabilities
4. **Be inclusive** - Actively prompt for unbiased, accessible code
5. **Know your policies** - Understand your organisation's AI guidelines
6. **Document appropriately** - Track AI assistance for transparency
7. **Stay informed** - AI capabilities and risks evolve rapidly

---

## Next Steps

- Complete the [Week 4 Lab](4-Week4-Lab.md) covering collaborative refactoring exercises
- Review the [Week 4 Prompts](5-Week4-Prompts.md) for security-focused prompt examples
- Revisit [Week 4 Overview](../../README.md) for additional resources

Commit message:

feat: add Prompt Engineering and Customisation workshop materials; include documentation generation, refinement techniques, and practical exercises

Workshops/Week4/3-Ethical-and-Security-Considerations.md, after:

# Ethical and Security Considerations with GitHub Copilot

**Duration:** 30-45 minutes  
**Format:** Discussion-led session with real-world scenarios  
**Objective:** Understand the ethical implications, security risks, and responsible practices when using AI-assisted coding tools.

---

## Session Overview

AI coding assistants like GitHub Copilot are powerful tools, but they come with responsibilities. This session explores the critical ethical and security considerations developers must understand.

**What you'll learn:**
- Intellectual property considerations in AI-generated code
- Security vulnerabilities and how to prevent them
- Responsible AI usage and bias awareness
- Organisational policies and compliance
- Best practices for safe AI-assisted development

---

## 1. Intellectual Property Considerations

### Understanding How Copilot Works

GitHub Copilot was trained on publicly available code from GitHub repositories. This raises important questions:

| Concern | Description | Mitigation |
|---------|-------------|------------|
| **License Attribution** | Generated code may resemble open-source code | Review for familiar patterns, add attribution where needed |
| **Copyrighted Code** | Suggestions may match publicly available code | Configure whether suggestions matching public code are allowed, and review code references when they appear |
| **Company IP** | Prompt and code handling depends on your plan and organisation settings | Follow your organisation policy, and review GitHub Copilot data and policy settings |
| **Patent Concerns** | Generated algorithms might infringe patents | Review novel implementations carefully |

### Copilot Settings for IP Protection

**Suggestions matching public code and code referencing**

GitHub Copilot can be configured to allow or block suggestions that match publicly available code. If suggestions matching public code are allowed, Copilot can also provide references to similar public code ("code referencing").

This is configured in either your personal settings or your organisation settings on GitHub.com.

In Visual Studio Code you can also view code references for accepted suggestions via the "GitHub Copilot Log (Code References)" output.

### Best Practices for IP Safety

1. **Review generated code** - Don't blindly accept, especially for algorithms
2. **Check for attribution** - If code looks familiar, search for its origin
3. **Use organisation settings** - Enable corporate IP protections
4. **Document AI usage** - Note when significant code is AI-generated
5. **Understand your licence** - Know what Copilot's terms allow

---

## 2. Security Vulnerabilities

### Common Security Risks in AI-Generated Code

**1. SQL Injection Vulnerabilities**

**Risky Generated Code:**
```python
def get_user(username):
    # DANGEROUS: SQL injection vulnerability
    query = f"SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = '{username}'"
    return db.execute(query)
```

**Secure Alternative:**
```python
def get_user(username: str) -> Optional[User]:
    """Safely retrieve user by username using parameterised query."""
    query = "SELECT * FROM users WHERE username = %s"
    return db.execute(query, (username,))
```

**2. Hardcoded Secrets**

**Risky Pattern:**
```python
# DANGEROUS: Copilot might suggest realistic-looking credentials
API_KEY = "sk_example_do_not_use"
DATABASE_URL = "postgresql://user:password@localhost:5432/dbname"
```

Tip: Use clearly fake placeholders in examples to avoid triggering secret scanners or accidental reuse.

**Secure Alternative:**
```python
import os
from dotenv import load_dotenv

load_dotenv()

API_KEY = os.environ.get("API_KEY")
DATABASE_URL = os.environ.get("DATABASE_URL")

if not API_KEY or not DATABASE_URL:
    raise EnvironmentError("Required environment variables not set")
```

**3. Insecure Cryptography**

**Risky Generated Code:**
```python
import hashlib

def hash_password(password):
    # DANGEROUS: MD5 is cryptographically broken
    return hashlib.md5(password.encode()).hexdigest()
```

**Secure Alternative:**
```python
import bcrypt

def hash_password(password: str) -> bytes:
    """Hash password using bcrypt with appropriate work factor."""
    salt = bcrypt.gensalt(rounds=12)
    return bcrypt.hashpw(password.encode('utf-8'), salt)

def verify_password(password: str, hashed: bytes) -> bool:
    """Verify password against stored hash."""
    return bcrypt.checkpw(password.encode('utf-8'), hashed)
```

**4. Path Traversal Vulnerabilities**

**Risky Generated Code:**
```python
def read_file(filename):
    # DANGEROUS: Allows reading any file on the system
    with open(f"/uploads/{filename}") as f:
        return f.read()
```

**Secure Alternative:**
```python
import os
from pathlib import Path

UPLOAD_DIR = Path("/uploads").resolve()

def read_file(filename: str) -> str:
    """Safely read file from uploads directory."""
    # Resolve the path and verify it's within UPLOAD_DIR
    file_path = (UPLOAD_DIR / filename).resolve()
    
    if not file_path.is_relative_to(UPLOAD_DIR):
        raise ValueError("Invalid file path")
    
    if not file_path.exists():
        raise FileNotFoundError(f"File not found: {filename}")
    
    return file_path.read_text()
```

---

### Security Review Prompts

**Prompt for Security Audit:**
```text
Perform a security audit on this code. Check for:
1. Injection vulnerabilities (SQL, command, XSS)
2. Authentication/authorisation flaws
3. Cryptographic weaknesses
4. Sensitive data exposure
5. Input validation gaps
6. Error handling issues that leak information

Provide severity rating and remediation for each finding.

[paste code here]
```

**Prompt for Secure Implementation:**
```text
Generate a secure implementation with these requirements:
- Input validation and sanitisation
- Parameterised queries for database access
- No hardcoded credentials
- Proper error handling without information leakage
- Secure cryptographic functions where needed
- OWASP Top 10 protection

Function: User authentication with password hashing
```

---

### Security Scanning Integration

**Prompt for Pre-Commit Security Check:**
```text
Create a pre-commit hook that scans for:
1. Hardcoded API keys or secrets (regex patterns)
2. SQL string concatenation
3. eval() or exec() usage
4. Insecure hash functions (MD5, SHA1)
5. HTTP URLs instead of HTTPS
6. Debug/development flags in production code

Fail commit if any issues found.
```

---

## 3. Responsible AI Usage

### Bias in AI-Generated Code

AI models can perpetuate biases present in training data:

| Bias Type | Example | Impact |
|-----------|---------|--------|
| **Variable naming** | Gender-specific defaults | Exclusionary code |
| **Assumptions** | Western-centric date formats | International users affected |
| **Stereotypes** | Role-based examples | Reinforces social biases |
| **Accessibility** | Missing ARIA labels | Excludes disabled users |

**Example of Biased Generation:**
```javascript
// Prompt: "Create a user profile form"
// Potentially biased output:
const userForm = {
    title: ['Mr', 'Mrs', 'Miss'],  // Missing inclusive options
    gender: ['Male', 'Female'],     // Binary assumption
    name: { first: '', last: '' }   // Assumes Western naming convention
};
```

**Inclusive Alternative:**
```javascript
const userForm = {
    title: ['Mr', 'Mrs', 'Ms', 'Mx', 'Dr', 'Prof', 'Prefer not to say'],
    gender: ['Male', 'Female', 'Non-binary', 'Prefer to self-describe', 'Prefer not to say'],
    name: { 
        displayName: '',      // Flexible for all cultures
        legalName: '',        // When legally required
        preferredName: ''     // User preference
    }
};
```

### Prompting for Inclusive Code

**Prompt:**
```text
Generate a user registration form that:
- Uses inclusive language and options
- Supports international name formats
- Provides flexible gender options
- Includes accessibility features (ARIA labels)
- Works with screen readers
- Supports right-to-left languages
```

---

### AI Transparency

**When to disclose AI usage:**

- **Internal documentation** - Note when significant code blocks are AI-generated
- **Code reviews** - Inform reviewers of AI assistance
- **Compliance contexts** - Some industries require disclosure
- **Educational settings** - Academic integrity requirements

**Documentation Pattern:**
```python
# AI-ASSISTED: Initial implementation generated with GitHub Copilot
# REVIEWED: [Date] by [Developer]
# MODIFIED: [List significant changes from original generation]
def complex_algorithm():
    """
    Implementation of X algorithm.
    
    Note: Core logic AI-generated, security review completed,
    edge cases added manually.
    """
    pass
```

---

## 4. Organisational Policies

### Developing an AI Coding Policy

**Key Policy Components:**

```markdown
# AI-Assisted Coding Policy

## Approved Tools
- GitHub Copilot (Business tier only)
- [List other approved tools]

## Prohibited Uses
- Generating code for security-critical systems without review
- Using AI for client-confidential codebases without approval
- Accepting suggestions without understanding them
- Bypassing code review processes

## Required Practices
1. Configure whether suggestions matching public code are allowed, and use code referencing when it is available
2. Review all AI suggestions before accepting
3. Run security scans on AI-generated code
4. Document significant AI-assisted implementations
5. Report concerning suggestions

## Data Handling
- No client data in prompts
- No proprietary algorithms as context
- Follow data classification guidelines

## Review Requirements
- AI-generated code requires standard code review
- Security-sensitive code requires additional security review
- Novel algorithms require architecture review
```

### Team Guidelines Prompt

**Prompt:**
```text
Create a team code review checklist specifically for AI-generated code:
- What additional scrutiny is needed?
- What patterns should reviewers watch for?
- How should AI assistance be documented in PRs?
- What questions should reviewers ask?
```

---

## 5. Practical Security Checklist

### Before Accepting AI Suggestions

- [ ] **Understand the code** - Can you explain what it does?
- [ ] **Check inputs** - Is all user input validated?
- [ ] **Review queries** - Are database queries parameterised?
- [ ] **Verify authentication** - Is access properly controlled?
- [ ] **Examine secrets** - Are there any hardcoded credentials?
- [ ] **Test error handling** - Does it fail safely?
- [ ] **Consider edge cases** - What happens with unexpected input?

### Code Review Checklist for AI-Generated Code

- [ ] **Logic verification** - Does the code do what was intended?
- [ ] **Security review** - Are there any OWASP Top 10 vulnerabilities?
- [ ] **Performance check** - Are there efficiency concerns?
- [ ] **Dependency review** - Are imported libraries secure and necessary?
- [ ] **Test coverage** - Are tests comprehensive and meaningful?
- [ ] **Documentation** - Is the code properly documented?
- [ ] **Standards compliance** - Does it follow team conventions?

---

## 6. Scenario Exercises

### Scenario 1: Suspicious Suggestion

You ask Copilot to generate a login function and it produces:

```python
def login(username, password):
    if username == "admin" and password == "admin123":
        return True
    # ... rest of implementation
```

**Discussion:**
- Why might Copilot suggest this?
- What's the security risk?
- How should you respond?

---

### Scenario 2: Familiar Code

Copilot suggests a sorting algorithm that looks identical to a well-known open-source implementation.

**Discussion:**
- What are the IP implications?
- Should you accept this suggestion?
- How do you verify the origin?

---

### Scenario 3: Biased Generation

When generating test data, Copilot produces:

```javascript
const employees = [
    { name: 'John', role: 'Engineer', salary: 100000 },
    { name: 'Sarah', role: 'Secretary', salary: 45000 },
    { name: 'Mike', role: 'Manager', salary: 120000 }
];
```

**Discussion:**
- What bias is present?
- How might this affect your application?
- How would you prompt for better test data?

---

## Key Takeaways

1. **AI is a tool, not a replacement** - You remain responsible for the code
2. **Trust but verify** - Always review AI suggestions critically
3. **Security first** - Assume AI-generated code may have vulnerabilities
4. **Be inclusive** - Actively prompt for unbiased, accessible code
5. **Know your policies** - Understand your organisation's AI guidelines
6. **Document appropriately** - Track AI assistance for transparency
7. **Stay informed** - AI capabilities and risks evolve rapidly

---

## Next Steps

- Complete the [Week 4 Lab](4-Week4-Lab.md) covering collaborative refactoring exercises
- Review the [Week 4 Prompts](5-Week4-Prompts.md) for security-focused prompt examples
- Revisit [Week 4 Overview](../../README.md) for additional resources
