Workshops/Week2/3-Week2-Lab.md, before:

# Week 2 - Customize Your GitHub Copilot Experience

Please follow the instructions below to complete the hands-on lab for Week 2.

_Customize GitHub Copilot's behavior with custom instructions, prompts, and custom agents for your specific development workflows._

## Welcome

- **Who is this for**: Developers and educators who want to tailor Copilot's behavior to their specific workflows
- **What you'll learn**: How to set up custom instructions, prompts, and custom agents to make Copilot more effective for your specific use cases
- **What you'll build**: A customized Copilot setup with instructions, prompts, and custom agents that automatically generate consistent pieces of code following your project standards
- **Prerequisites**: [Getting Started with GitHub Copilot](https://github.com/skills/getting-started-with-github-copilot) exercise
- **How long**: This exercise takes less than 30 minutes to complete.

In this exercise, you will:

1. Set up repository-wide custom instructions to provide Copilot the essential project context
1. Create targeted custom instructions for specific file types and directories
1. Build reusable prompt templates for common development tasks and recurring patterns
1. Configure custom agents for specialized workflows

### How to start this exercise

Simply copy the exercise to your account, then give your favorite Octocat (Mona) **about 20 seconds** to prepare the first lesson, then **refresh the page**.

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Copy%20Exercise-%E2%86%92-1f883d?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&labelColor=197935)](https://github.com/new?template_owner=skills&template_name=customize-your-github-copilot-experience&owner=%40me&name=skills-customize-your-github-copilot-experience&description=Exercise:+Customize+Your+GitHub+Copilot+Experience&visibility=public)

<details>
<summary>Having trouble? 🤷</summary><br/>

When copying the exercise, we recommend the following settings:

- For owner, choose your personal account or an organization to host the repository.

- We recommend creating a public repository, since private repositories will use Actions minutes.

If the exercise isn't ready in 20 seconds, please check the [Actions](../../actions) tab.

- Check to see if a job is running. Sometimes it simply takes a bit longer.

- If the page shows a failed job, please submit an issue. Nice, you found a bug! 🐛

</details>

---

&copy; 2025 GitHub &bull; [Code of Conduct](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/version/2/1/code_of_conduct/code_of_conduct.md) &bull; [MIT License](https://gh.io/mit)

Commit message:

feat: update GitHub Copilot documentation with interaction modes, custom agents, and prompt engineering best practices (#9)

Workshops/Week2/3-Week2-Lab.md, after:

# Week 2 - Customize Your GitHub Copilot Experience

Please follow the instructions below to complete the hands-on lab for Week 2.

_Customize GitHub Copilot's behavior with custom instructions, prompts, and custom agents for your specific development workflows._

## Welcome

- **Who is this for**: Developers and educators who want to tailor Copilot's behavior to their specific workflows
- **What you'll learn**: How to set up custom instructions, prompts, and custom agents to make Copilot more effective for your specific use cases
- **What you'll build**: A customized Copilot setup with instructions, prompts, and custom agents that automatically generate consistent pieces of code following your project standards
- **Prerequisites**: [Getting Started with GitHub Copilot](https://github.com/skills/getting-started-with-github-copilot) exercise
- **How long**: This exercise takes less than 30 minutes to complete.

In this exercise, you will:

1. Set up repository-wide custom instructions to provide Copilot the essential project context
1. Create targeted custom instructions for specific file types and directories
1. Build reusable prompt templates for common development tasks and recurring patterns
1. Configure custom agents for specialized workflows

### How to start this exercise

Simply copy the exercise to your account, then give your favorite Octocat (Mona) **about 20 seconds** to prepare the first lesson, then **refresh the page**.

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Copy%20Exercise-%E2%86%92-1f883d?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&labelColor=197935)](https://github.com/new?template_owner=skills&template_name=customize-your-github-copilot-experience&owner=%40me&name=skills-customize-your-github-copilot-experience&description=Exercise:+Customize+Your+GitHub+Copilot+Experience&visibility=public)

<details>
<summary>Having trouble? 🤷</summary><br/>

When copying the exercise, we recommend the following settings:

- For owner, choose your personal account or an organization to host the repository.

- We recommend creating a public repository, since private repositories will use Actions minutes.

If the exercise isn't ready in 20 seconds, please check the [Actions](../../actions) tab.

- Check to see if a job is running. Sometimes it simply takes a bit longer.

- If the page shows a failed job, please submit an issue. Nice, you found a bug! 🐛

</details>

---

Attribution: This lab is based on the GitHub Skills template **Customize your GitHub Copilot experience**.
Upstream source: https://github.com/skills/customize-your-github-copilot-experience
