Workshops/Week1/4-week1-lab.md, before:

# Week 1 - Getting Started with GitHub Copilot Hands-On Lab

Please follow the instructions below to complete the hands-on lab for Week 1.

_Get started using GitHub Copilot in less than an hour._

- **Who is this for**: Developers at any experience level looking to accelerate their code workflow.
- **What you'll learn**: The different ways to interact with Copilot to explain, write, debug, and develop code.
- **What you'll build**: You will guide Copilot to update Mergington High School's extracurricular activities website.
- **Prerequisites**:
  - Skills exercise: [Introduction to GitHub](https://github.com/skills/introduction-to-github)
  - Familiarity with [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
  - Basic coding principles
- **How long**: This exercise takes less than one hour to complete.

In this exercise, you will:

1. Use a preconfigured Codespace to run VS Code in your browser.
1. Learn different interaction options to develop with GitHub Copilot.
1. Use Copilot to summarize and review your pull request.

### How to start this exercise

Simply copy the exercise to your account, then give your favorite Octocat (Mona) **about 20 seconds** to prepare the first lesson, then **refresh the page**.

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Copy%20Exercise-%E2%86%92-1f883d?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&labelColor=197935)](https://github.com/new?template_owner=skills&template_name=getting-started-with-github-copilot&owner=%40me&name=skills-getting-started-with-github-copilot&description=Exercise:+Get+started+using+GitHub+Copilot&visibility=public)

<details>
<summary>Having trouble? 🤷</summary><br/>

When copying the exercise, we recommend the following settings:

- For owner, choose your personal account or an organization to host the repository.

- We recommend creating a public repository, since private repositories will use Actions minutes.
   
If the exercise isn't ready in 20 seconds, please check the [Actions](../../actions) tab.

- Check to see if a job is running. Sometimes it simply takes a bit longer.

- If the page shows a failed job, please submit an issue. Nice, you found a bug! 🐛

</details>

---

&copy; 2026 GitHub &bull; [Code of Conduct](https://www.contributor-covenant.org/version/2/1/code_of_conduct/code_of_conduct.md) &bull; [MIT License](https://gh.io/mit)

---

## Next Steps

- **Week 1 Prompt Examples:** After completing this interactive [hands-on lab](4-week1-lab.md), take a look at [Week 1 Prompt Examples](5-Week1-Prompts.md) to see how to craft effective prompts for GitHub Copilot.

Commit message:

feat: update GitHub Copilot documentation with interaction modes, custom agents, and prompt engineering best practices
docs: refine lab instructions and add attribution for GitHub Skills templates

fix: correct code examples and improve clarity in testing and quality assurance documentation

chore: enhance metrics documentation for GitHub Copilot adoption measurement and daily capture scorecard

style: standardize British English spelling and grammar in markdown instructions

Workshops/Week1/4-week1-lab.md, after:

# Week 1 - Getting Started with GitHub Copilot Hands-On Lab

Please follow the instructions below to complete the hands-on lab for Week 1.

_Get started using GitHub Copilot in less than an hour._

- **Who is this for**: Developers at any experience level looking to accelerate their code workflow.
- **What you'll learn**: The different ways to interact with Copilot to explain, write, debug, and develop code.
- **What you'll build**: You will guide Copilot to update Mergington High School's extracurricular activities website.
- **Prerequisites**:
  - Skills exercise: [Introduction to GitHub](https://github.com/skills/introduction-to-github)
  - Familiarity with [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
  - Basic coding principles
- **How long**: This exercise takes less than one hour to complete.

In this exercise, you will:

1. Use a preconfigured Codespace to run VS Code in your browser.
1. Learn different interaction options to develop with GitHub Copilot.
1. Use Copilot to summarize and review your pull request.

### How to start this exercise

Simply copy the exercise to your account, then give your favorite Octocat (Mona) **about 20 seconds** to prepare the first lesson, then **refresh the page**.

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Copy%20Exercise-%E2%86%92-1f883d?style=for-the-badge&logo=github&labelColor=197935)](https://github.com/new?template_owner=skills&template_name=getting-started-with-github-copilot&owner=%40me&name=skills-getting-started-with-github-copilot&description=Exercise:+Get+started+using+GitHub+Copilot&visibility=public)

<details>
<summary>Having trouble? 🤷</summary><br/>

When copying the exercise, we recommend the following settings:

- For owner, choose your personal account or an organisation to host the repository.

- We recommend creating a public repository, since private repositories will use Actions minutes.
   
If the exercise isn't ready in 20 seconds, please check the [Actions](../../actions) tab.

- Check to see if a job is running. Sometimes it simply takes a bit longer.

- If the page shows a failed job, please submit an issue. Nice, you found a bug! 🐛

</details>

---

Attribution: This lab is based on the GitHub Skills template **Getting started with GitHub Copilot**.
Upstream source: https://github.com/skills/getting-started-with-github-copilot

---

## Next Steps

- **Week 1 Prompt Examples:** After completing this interactive [hands-on lab](4-week1-lab.md), take a look at [Week 1 Prompt Examples](5-Week1-Prompts.md) to see how to craft effective prompts for GitHub Copilot.
