Workshops/Week1/5-Week1-Prompts.md, before:

# GitHub Copilot Prompt Examples - Week 1

## Session Overview

**Purpose:** Reference guide for practical prompts  
**Format:** Example prompts with explanations and tips  
**Objective:** Help developers get started with GitHub Copilot's different interaction modes and basic workflows.

---

## Contents

- [1. Inline Code Completions](#1-inline-code-completions)
- [2. Ask Mode - Code Explanations](#2-ask-mode---code-explanations)
- [3. Edit Mode - Code Modifications](#3-edit-mode---code-modifications)
- [4. Agent Mode - Multi-File Changes](#4-agent-mode---multi-file-changes)
- [5. Plan Mode - Implementation Planning](#5-plan-mode---implementation-planning)
- [6. Debugging Assistance](#6-debugging-assistance)
- [7. Documentation Generation](#7-documentation-generation)

---

## 1. Inline Code Completions

Inline code completions provide real-time suggestions as you type, helping you write code faster.

- Write descriptive comments or function signatures to guide Copilot
- Let Copilot suggest implementations for common patterns
- Use during active coding for quick boilerplate generation
- Accept suggestions with Tab key or reject with Escape

### Example Prompts

#### Function with Clear Intent

```javascript
// Function to validate email address format using regex
function validateEmail(email) {
```

Expected: Copilot suggests regex validation logic and return statement.

#### Array Operations

```javascript
// Filter students with grades above 80
const topStudents = students.filter(
```

Expected: Copilot completes the filter function with appropriate logic.

#### Error Handling

```javascript
// Try to fetch user data, catch and log errors
try {
```

Expected: Copilot suggests try-catch block with fetch call and error handling.

> **Tip:** The more descriptive your comment, the better Copilot can infer your intent.

---

## 2. Ask Mode - Code Explanations

Ask mode allows you to have conversational interactions with Copilot to understand code and concepts.

- Use Copilot Chat to ask questions about code
- Get explanations of functionality and libraries
- Learn best practices and modern patterns
- Explore unfamiliar codebases with guided assistance

### Example Prompts

#### Understanding Code

```text
What does this function do?
```

```text
Explain this regex pattern step by step
```

```text
How does this event listener work?
```

#### Learning Concepts

```text
What's the difference between `let` and `const` in JavaScript?
```

```text
Explain async/await and how it differs from promises
```

```text
What are the benefits of using TypeScript?
```

#### Best Practices

```text
What's the best way to handle errors in this function?
```

```text
How can I make this code more efficient?
```

```text
Is there a more modern JavaScript syntax for this code?
```

> **Tip:** Ask follow-up questions to dive deeper into topics you don't fully understand.

---

## 3. Edit Mode - Code Modifications

Edit mode enables controlled modifications to specific files in your working set.

- Select Edit from the agents dropdown in Copilot Chat
- Add files to your working set before prompting
- Make targeted changes to a defined set of files
- Review and accept or discard individual edits

### Example Prompts

#### Refactoring

```text
Refactor this function to use arrow function syntax
```

```text
Convert this code to use async/await instead of callbacks
```

```text
Extract this validation logic into a separate function
```

#### Adding Features

```text
Add error handling to this function
```

```text
Add JSDoc comments to this function
```

```text
Add input validation for email and password
```

#### Bug Fixes

```text
Fix the off-by-one error in this loop
```

```text
Correct the logic in this conditional statement
```

```text
Fix the memory leak in this event listener
```

> **Tip:** Add relevant files to your working set before submitting your prompt. Review and Accept or Discard edits for each file.

---

## 4. Agent Mode - Multi-File Changes

Agent mode allows Copilot to autonomously determine and execute multi-step tasks.

- Select Agent from the agents dropdown in Copilot Chat
- Describe your task and let Copilot determine the steps
- Copilot autonomously identifies files to change
- Suggests terminal commands and iterates to complete tasks
- Confirm or reject suggested actions as Copilot works

### Example Prompts

#### Feature Implementation

```text
Create a new user profile component with:
- ProfileCard component in components folder
- User interface in types folder
- Styling in styles folder
- Export from index.ts
```

```text
Add form validation across the login form:
- Client-side validation in the component
- Validation utilities in utils folder
- Error message constants in constants file
```

#### Code Organization

```text
Reorganize the authentication code:
- Move auth functions to auth/index.ts
- Create types in auth/types.ts
- Update all imports across the project
```

> **Tip:** In Agent mode, Copilot autonomously determines which files need changes. Confirm or reject suggested terminal commands as Copilot iterates to complete your task.

---

## 5. Plan Mode - Implementation Planning

Plan mode helps you think through tasks before executing by creating detailed implementation plans.

- Select Plan from the agents dropdown in Copilot Chat
- Copilot researches your codebase to understand context
- Creates a detailed implementation plan for review
- Waits for your approval before making any changes
- Useful for team review and ensuring all requirements are considered

### Example Prompts

#### New Feature Planning

```text
Create a simple to-do web app with HTML, CSS, and JS files
```

```text
Plan adding user authentication to this Express application
```

#### Refactoring Planning

```text
Plan how to migrate this codebase from JavaScript to TypeScript
```

```text
Outline the steps to refactor this monolithic function into smaller modules
```

> **Tip:** After reviewing the plan, click "Start Implementation" to hand off to Agent mode, or "Open in Editor" to save the plan as Markdown for later.

---

## 6. Debugging Assistance

Debugging assistance helps you identify, understand, and fix issues in your code.

- Ask Copilot to help identify bugs and errors
- Get explanations for unexpected behaviour
- Trace through logic to find issues
- Add debugging statements and test cases
- Include error messages for better diagnostics

### Example Prompts

#### Error Diagnosis

```text
Why am I getting "Cannot read property 'map' of undefined"?
```

```text
This function returns NaN, help me find the issue
```

```text
Why isn't this event listener triggering?
```

#### Logic Issues

```text
This loop doesn't produce the expected output, what's wrong?
```

```text
Help me understand why this condition is always false
```

```text
Why does this function return undefined?
```

#### Testing/Debugging

```text
Add console.log statements to help debug this function
```

```text
How can I test this function to identify the bug?
```

```text
What edge cases should I test for this validation function?
```

> **Tip:** Include the error message and relevant code context when asking for debugging help.

---

## 7. Documentation Generation

Documentation generation helps you create clear, professional documentation for your code.

- Generate JSDoc comments for functions
- Create API documentation for endpoints
- Write README content for projects
- Add inline comments explaining complex logic
- Produce usage examples for utilities

### Example Prompts

#### Function Documentation

```text
Add JSDoc comments to this function
```

```text
Generate documentation for this API endpoint
```

```text
Create inline comments explaining this complex algorithm
```

#### Project Documentation

```text
Generate a README.md for this project
```

```text
Create API documentation for these endpoints
```

```text
Write usage examples for this utility function
```

#### Code Comments

```text
Add comments explaining this regex pattern
```

```text
Document the purpose of each parameter in this function
```

```text
Explain what this code block does for future maintainers
```

> **Tip:** Good documentation makes your code more maintainable. Use Copilot to quickly add professional documentation.

---

## Week 1 Feedback

Please complete the following reflections after completing Week 1 activities:

- [Submit Week 1 Lab Reflection](../../issues/new?template=week1-lab.yml)
- [Submit Weekly Reflection](../../issues/new?template=weekly-reflection.yml)

---

## Next Steps

After mastering these basic prompting techniques and workflows in Week 1, we will explore more advanced strategies in Week 2 to further enhance your productivity with GitHub Copilot.
**[← Back to Main README](../../README.md)** | **[Continue to Week 2 →](../Week2/1-Prompt-Engineering-Best-Practices.md)**

Commit message:

feat: update GitHub Copilot documentation with interaction modes, custom agents, and prompt engineering best practices (#9)

Workshops/Week1/5-Week1-Prompts.md, after:

# GitHub Copilot Prompt Examples - Week 1

## Session Overview

**Purpose:** Reference guide for practical prompts  
**Format:** Example prompts with explanations and tips  
**Objective:** Help developers get started with GitHub Copilot's different interaction modes and basic workflows.

---

## Contents

- [1. Inline Code Completions](#1-inline-code-completions)
- [2. Ask Mode - Code Explanations](#2-ask-mode---code-explanations)
- [3. Edit Mode - Code Modifications](#3-edit-mode---code-modifications)
- [4. Agent Mode - Multi-File Changes](#4-agent-mode---multi-file-changes)
- [5. Plan Mode - Implementation Planning](#5-plan-mode---implementation-planning)
- [6. Debugging Assistance](#6-debugging-assistance)
- [7. Documentation Generation](#7-documentation-generation)

---

## 1. Inline Code Completions

Inline code completions provide real-time suggestions as you type, helping you write code faster.

- Write descriptive comments or function signatures to guide Copilot
- Let Copilot suggest implementations for common patterns
- Use during active coding for quick boilerplate generation
- Accept suggestions with Tab key or reject with Escape

### Example Prompts

#### Function with Clear Intent

```javascript
// Function to validate email address format using regex
function validateEmail(email) {
```

Expected: Copilot suggests regex validation logic and return statement.

#### Array Operations

```javascript
// Filter students with grades above 80
const topStudents = students.filter(
```

Expected: Copilot completes the filter function with appropriate logic.

#### Error Handling

```javascript
// Try to fetch user data, catch and log errors
try {
```

Expected: Copilot suggests try-catch block with fetch call and error handling.

> **Tip:** The more descriptive your comment, the better Copilot can infer your intent.

---

## 2. Ask Mode - Code Explanations

Ask mode allows you to have conversational interactions with Copilot to understand code and concepts.

- Use Copilot Chat to ask questions about code
- Get explanations of functionality and libraries
- Learn best practices and modern patterns
- Explore unfamiliar codebases with guided assistance

### Example Prompts

#### Understanding Code

```text
What does this function do?
```

```text
Explain this regex pattern step by step
```

```text
How does this event listener work?
```

#### Learning Concepts

```text
What's the difference between `let` and `const` in JavaScript?
```

```text
Explain async/await and how it differs from promises
```

```text
What are the benefits of using TypeScript?
```

#### Best Practices

```text
What's the best way to handle errors in this function?
```

```text
How can I make this code more efficient?
```

```text
Is there a more modern JavaScript syntax for this code?
```

> **Tip:** Ask follow-up questions to dive deeper into topics you don't fully understand.

---

## 3. Edit Mode - Code Modifications

> **Note:** Edit mode is not available in every IDE. If you don’t see **Edit** in your Copilot Chat agents dropdown, check your IDE/version against the [Copilot feature matrix](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/reference/copilot-feature-matrix).

Edit mode enables controlled modifications to specific files in your working set.

- Select Edit from the agents dropdown in Copilot Chat
- Add files to your working set before prompting
- Make targeted changes to a defined set of files
- Review and accept or discard individual edits

### Example Prompts

#### Refactoring

```text
Refactor this function to use arrow function syntax
```

```text
Convert this code to use async/await instead of callbacks
```

```text
Extract this validation logic into a separate function
```

#### Adding Features

```text
Add error handling to this function
```

```text
Add JSDoc comments to this function
```

```text
Add input validation for email and password
```

#### Bug Fixes

```text
Fix the off-by-one error in this loop
```

```text
Correct the logic in this conditional statement
```

```text
Fix the memory leak in this event listener
```

> **Tip:** Add relevant files to your working set before submitting your prompt. Review and Accept or Discard edits for each file.

---

## 4. Agent Mode - Multi-File Changes

> **Note:** Agent mode availability varies by IDE/version and may depend on policy settings. If you don’t see **Agent** in your Copilot Chat agents dropdown, check the [Copilot feature matrix](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/reference/copilot-feature-matrix).

Agent mode allows Copilot to autonomously determine and execute multi-step tasks.

- Select Agent from the agents dropdown in Copilot Chat
- Describe your task and let Copilot determine the steps
- Copilot autonomously identifies files to change
- Suggests terminal commands and iterates to complete tasks
- Confirm or reject suggested actions as Copilot works

### Example Prompts

#### Feature Implementation

```text
Create a new user profile component with:
- ProfileCard component in components folder
- User interface in types folder
- Styling in styles folder
- Export from index.ts
```

```text
Add form validation across the login form:
- Client-side validation in the component
- Validation utilities in utils folder
- Error message constants in constants file
```

#### Code Organization

```text
Reorganize the authentication code:
- Move auth functions to auth/index.ts
- Create types in auth/types.ts
- Update all imports across the project
```

> **Tip:** In Agent mode, Copilot autonomously determines which files need changes. Confirm or reject suggested terminal commands as Copilot iterates to complete your task.

---

## 5. Plan Mode - Implementation Planning

> **Note:** Plan mode is in public preview and subject to change. Availability varies by IDE/version. See the [Copilot feature matrix](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/reference/copilot-feature-matrix).

Plan mode helps you think through tasks before executing by creating detailed implementation plans.

- Select Plan from the agents dropdown in Copilot Chat
- Copilot researches your codebase to understand context
- Creates a detailed implementation plan for review
- Waits for your approval before making any changes
- Useful for team review and ensuring all requirements are considered

### Example Prompts

#### New Feature Planning

```text
Create a simple to-do web app with HTML, CSS, and JS files
```

```text
Plan adding user authentication to this Express application
```

#### Refactoring Planning

```text
Plan how to migrate this codebase from JavaScript to TypeScript
```

```text
Outline the steps to refactor this monolithic function into smaller modules
```

> **Tip:** After reviewing the plan, click "Start Implementation" to hand off to Agent mode, or "Open in Editor" to save the plan as Markdown for later.

---

## 6. Debugging Assistance

Debugging assistance helps you identify, understand, and fix issues in your code.

- Ask Copilot to help identify bugs and errors
- Get explanations for unexpected behaviour
- Trace through logic to find issues
- Add debugging statements and test cases
- Include error messages for better diagnostics

### Example Prompts

#### Error Diagnosis

```text
Why am I getting "Cannot read property 'map' of undefined"?
```

```text
This function returns NaN, help me find the issue
```

```text
Why isn't this event listener triggering?
```

#### Logic Issues

```text
This loop doesn't produce the expected output, what's wrong?
```

```text
Help me understand why this condition is always false
```

```text
Why does this function return undefined?
```

#### Testing/Debugging

```text
Add console.log statements to help debug this function
```

```text
How can I test this function to identify the bug?
```

```text
What edge cases should I test for this validation function?
```

> **Tip:** Include the error message and relevant code context when asking for debugging help.

---

## 7. Documentation Generation

Documentation generation helps you create clear, professional documentation for your code.

- Generate JSDoc comments for functions
- Create API documentation for endpoints
- Write README content for projects
- Add inline comments explaining complex logic
- Produce usage examples for utilities

### Example Prompts

#### Function Documentation

```text
Add JSDoc comments to this function
```

```text
Generate documentation for this API endpoint
```

```text
Create inline comments explaining this complex algorithm
```

#### Project Documentation

```text
Generate a README.md for this project
```

```text
Create API documentation for these endpoints
```

```text
Write usage examples for this utility function
```

#### Code Comments

```text
Add comments explaining this regex pattern
```

```text
Document the purpose of each parameter in this function
```

```text
Explain what this code block does for future maintainers
```

> **Tip:** Good documentation makes your code more maintainable. Use Copilot to quickly add professional documentation.

---

## Week 1 Feedback

Please complete the following reflections after completing Week 1 activities:

- [Submit Week 1 Lab Reflection](../../issues/new?template=week1-lab.yml)
- [Submit Weekly Reflection](../../issues/new?template=weekly-reflection.yml)

---

## Next Steps

After mastering these basic prompting techniques and workflows in Week 1, we will explore more advanced strategies in Week 2 to further enhance your productivity with GitHub Copilot.
**[← Back to Main README](../../README.md)** | **[Continue to Week 2 →](../Week2/1-Prompt-Engineering-Best-Practices.md)**
